
As dual therapy, ceftriaxone and azithromycin should be administered together on the same day, preferably simultaneously and under direct observation. Ceftriaxone in a single injection of 250 mg provides sustained, high bactericidal levels in the blood. Extensive clinical experience indicates that ceftriaxone is safe and effective for the treatment of uncomplicated gonorrhea at all anatomic sites, curing 99.2% of uncomplicated urogenital and anorectal and 98.9% of pharyngeal infections in clinical trials567,568. No clinical or pharmacodynamic data exist to support use of doses of ceftriaxone >250 mg. 

Single-dose injectable cephalosporin regimens (other than ceftriaxone 250 mg IM) that are safe and generally effective against uncomplicated urogenital and anorectal gonococcal infections include ceftizoxime (500 mg IM), cefoxitin (2 g IM with probenecid 1 g orally), and cefotaxime (500 mg IM). None of these injectable cephalosporins offer any advantage over ceftriaxone for urogenital infection, and efficacy for pharyngeal infection is less certain 567,568. Several other antimicrobials are active against N. gonorrhoeae, but none have substantial advantages over the recommended regimen, and efficacy data (especially for pharyngeal infection) are limited.

A 400-mg oral dose of cefixime should only be considered as an alternative cephalosporin regimen because it does not provide as high, nor as sustained, bactericidal blood levels as a 250-mg dose of ceftriaxone; further, it demonstrates limited efficacy for treatment of pharyngeal gonorrhea (92.3% cure, 95% CI=74.9%-99.1%); in older clinical studies, cefixime cured 97.5% of uncomplicated urogenital and anorectal gonococcal infections (95% CI=95.4%-99.8%) 567,568. The increase in the prevalence of isolates obtained through GISP with elevated cefixime MICs might indicate early stages of development of clinically significant gonococcal resistance to cephalosporins. CDC anticipates that rising cefixime MICs soon will result in declining effectiveness of cefixime for the treatment of urogenital gonorrhea. Furthermore, as cefixime becomes less effective, continued used of cefixime might hasten the development of resistance to ceftriaxone, a safe, well-tolerated, injectable cephalosporin and the last antimicrobial that is known to be highly effective in a single dose for treatment of gonorrhea at all anatomic sites of infection. Other oral cephalosporins (e.g., cefpodoxime and cefuroxime) are not recommended because of inferior efficacy and less favorable pharmacodynamics567,569.

Because of the prevalence of tetracycline resistance among GISP isolates, particularly those with elevated cefixime MICs 118, , the use of azithromycin as the second antimicrobial is preferred. However, in the case of azithromycin allergy, doxycycline (100 mg orally twice a day for 7 days) can be used in place of azithromycin as an alternative second antimicrobial when used in combination with ceftriaxone or cefixime.

In a recent clinical trial, dual treatment of uncomplicated, urogenital gonorrhea with single doses of oral gemifloxacin 320 mg plus oral azithromycin 2 g was associated with cure rates of 99.5% (lower one-sided 95% CI bound = 97.6%), and dual treatment with single doses of intramuscular gentamicin 240 mg plus oral azithromycin 2 g cured 100% of cases (lower one-sided 95% CI bound = 98.5%)570  . This trial was not powered to provide reliable estimates of the efficacy of these regimens for treatment of rectal or pharyngeal infection, but both regimens cured the few extra-genital infections among study participants. Either of these regimens may be considered as alternative treatment options in the presence of cephalosporin allergy. However, gastrointestinal adverse events may limit their use: 7.7% of patients treated with gemifloxacin plus azithromycin and 3.3% of patients treated with gentamicin plus azithromycin vomited within 1 hour of medication administration, necessitating retreatment with a ceftriaxone and azithromycin.

Spectinomycin, which is useful in persons who cannot tolerate cephalosporins, is expensive, has poor efficacy against pharyngeal infection (51.8%; 95% CI=38.7%-64.9%) 567, and is not being produced in the United States 571. However it has been effective in clinical trials, curing 98.2% of uncomplicated urogenital and anorectal gonococcal infections567. When available, spectinomycin is an effective alternative for the treatment of urogenital and anorectal infection. 

Monotherapy with azithromycin 2 g orally as a single dose has been demonstrated to be 99.2% effective against uncomplicated urogenital gonorrhea (95% CI = 97.3%–99.9%) 568. However, monotherapy is no longer recommended because of concerns over the ease with which N. gonorrhoeae can develop resistance to macrolides, and because several studies have documented azithromycin treatment failures 572 547,573-575.  Strains of N. gonorrhoeae circulating in the United States are not adequately susceptible to penicillins, tetracyclines, and older macrolides (e.g., erythromycin), and thus use of these antimicrobials cannot be recommended.
