
Disseminated gonococcal infection (DGI) frequently results in petechial or pustular acral skin lesions, asymmetrical polyarthralgia, tenosynovitis, or oligoarticular septic arthritis [^581]. The infection is complicated occasionally by perihepatitis and rarely by endocarditis or meningitis. Some strains of _N. gonorrhoeae_ that cause DGI can cause minimal genital inflammation. If DGI is suspected, NAAT or culture specimens from urogenital and extragenital sites, as applicable, should be collected and processed in addition to specimens from disseminated sites of infection (e.g., skin, synovial fluid, blood, and the CNS).  All _N. gonorrhoeae_ isolates should be tested for antimicrobial susceptibility. 

Hospitalization and consultation with an infectious disease specialist are recommended for initial therapy, especially for persons who might not comply with treatment, the diagnosis is uncertain, and those with purulent synovial effusions or other complications. Examination for clinical evidence of endocarditis and meningitis should be performed.

When treating for the arthritis-dermatitis syndrome, the provider can switch to an oral agent guided by antimicrobial susceptibility testing 24-48 hours after substantial clinical improvement for a total treatment course of at least 7 days.

No recent studies have been published on the treatment of DGI. The duration of treatment of DGI has not been systematically studied and should be determined in consultation with an infectious-disease specialist. Treatment for DGI should be guided by the results of antimicrobial susceptibility testing. Pending antimicrobial susceptibility results, treatment decisions should be made on the basis of clinical presentation. Therapy for meningitis should be continued with recommended parenteral therapy for 10–14 days. Parenteral antimicrobial therapy for endocarditis should be administered for at least 4 weeks.

[^581]:Haimovici R, Roussel TJ. Treatment of gonococcal conjunctivitis with single-dose intramuscular ceftriaxone. Am J Ophthalmol 1989;107:511–4.