
Latent syphilis is defined as syphilis characterized by seroreactivity without other evidence of primary, secondary, or tertiary disease. Persons who have latent syphilis and who acquired syphilis during the preceding year are classified as having early latent syphilis, a subset of latent syphilis. Persons can receive a diagnosis of early latent syphilis if, during the year preceding the diagnosis, they had 1) a documented seroconversion or a sustained (>2 week) fourfold or greater increase in nontreponemal test titers; 2) unequivocal symptoms of primary or secondary syphilis; or 3) a sex partner documented to have primary, secondary, or early latent syphilis. In addition, for persons with reactive nontreponemal and treponemal tests whose only possible exposure occurred during the previous 12 months, early latent syphilis can be assumed. In the absence of these conditions, an asymptomatic person should be considered to have latent syphilis. Nontreponemal serologic titers usually are higher early in the course of syphilis infection. However, early latent syphilis cannot be reliably diagnosed solely on the basis of nontreponemal titers. All persons with latent syphilis should have careful examination of all accessible mucosal surfaces (i.e., the oral cavity, perianal area, perineum and vagina in women, and underneath the foreskin in uncircumcised men) to evaluate for mucosal lesions.

### Treatment

Because latent syphilis is not transmitted sexually, the objective of treating persons in this stage of disease is to prevent complications and transmission from a pregnant woman to her fetus. Although clinical experience supports the effectiveness of penicillin in achieving this goal, limited evidence is available to guide choice of specific regimens or duration.

Available data demonstrate that additional doses of benzathine penicillin G, amoxicillin, or other antibiotics in early latent syphilis do not enhance efficacy, regardless of HIV infection[^406]  [^407].

Infants and children aged ≥1 month diagnosed with latent syphilis should be managed by a pediatric infectious-disease specialist and receive a CSF examination. In addition, birth and maternal medical records should be reviewed to assess whether these infants and children have congenital or acquired syphilis. For those with congenital syphilis, treatment should be undertaken as described in the congenital syphilis section in this document. Those with acquired latent syphilis should be evaluated for sexual abuse (e.g., through consultation with child protection services) (see Sexual Assault or Abuse of Children). These regimens are for penicillin nonallergic children who have acquired syphilis and who have normal CSF examination results.

[^406]:Rolfs RT, Joesoef MR, Hendershot EF, et al. The Syphilis and HIV Study Group. A randomized trial of enhanced therapy for early syphilis in patients with and without human immunodeficiency virus infection. N Engl J Med 1997;337:307–14.
[^407]:Taiwan HIV and Syphilis Study Group. Comparison of effectiveness of 1 dose versus 3 doses of benzathine penicillin in treatment of early syphilis in HIV-infected patients:  multicenter, prospective observational study in Taiwan [Abstract# S-119]. Presented at:  the 20th Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections (CROI 2013); March 3-6, 2013; Atlanta, GA.
